<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<?xml-model href="http://www.daisy.org/pipeline/modules/nordic/nordic-html5.rng"?>
<?xml-model href="http://www.daisy.org/pipeline/modules/nordic/nordic2015-1.sch"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en" lang="en" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#"
    xmlns:nordic="http://www.mtm.se/epub/">
    <head>
        <meta charset="UTF-8" />
        <title>Valentin Haüy - the father of the education for the blind</title>
        <meta content="C00000.invalid" name="dc:identifier" />
        <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width" />
    </head>
    <body id="d910e694" epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
        <div id="page_5" class="page-normal" epub:type="pagebreak" title="5"></div>
        <h1 id="d910e696">1. Research questions</h1>
        <pre><code>
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        ...
    }
</code></pre>
        <p>
            <span id="dtb128">My interest in Valentin Haüy, the father of education for the blind in Europe, was aroused while working at <abbr title="The Swedish Library of Talking Books and Braille"
                    id="d910e709" epub:type="z3998:initialism" class="initialism">MTM</abbr> on a book about Louis Braille, the creator of the Braille system. </span>
            <span id="dtb129">I discovered that there was a dearth of literature on Haüy in Swedish, and that in the limited literature I was able to consult, information about him was often
                contradictory. </span>
            <span id="dtb130">In particular, I noticed that there were no references to the period of the more than ten years which Haüy spent in Russia.</span>
        </p>
        <p>
            <span id="dtb131">In this paper I have proposed a number of research questions:</span>
        </p>
        <ul id="dtb132">
            <li id="d910e728">
                <span id="dtb133">Who was Valentin Haüy? </span>
                <span id="dtb134">What do we know about his life?</span>
            </li>
            <li id="d910e737">
                <span id="dtb135">What role did he play in the creation of special education for the blind?</span>
            </li>
            <li id="d910e743">
                <span id="dtb136">Was he really "the father of education for the blind" or were there others who merit that distinction?</span>
            </li>
            <li id="d910e749">
                <span id="dtb137">How great was his influence on the introduction of education for the blind in Sweden and other countries?</span>
            </li>
            <li id="d910e755">
                <span id="dtb138">What were his teaching methods?</span>
            </li>
            <li id="d910e762">
                <span id="dtb139">What happened during his stay in Russia - did he in fact found an institute for the blind in St Petersburg?</span>
            </li>
        </ul>
    </body>
</html>
