Assembly for the DAISY Pipeline 2 distribution
==============================================

The default Pipeline 2 distribution is assembled with the [Maven Assembly Plugin](http://maven.apache.org/plugins/maven-assembly-plugin/). 

The library dependencies and list of Pipeline 2 modules are configured in the main `pom.xml` and copied in a set of goals of the `maven-dependency-plugin`.

The project allows to build the following distributions:

 - the "CLI" distribution (with the command line user interface), packaged as a ZIP (_default_)
 - the "macOS Application Bundle" distribution
 - the "Windows installer" distribution
 - the "Developers" distribution generates the configuration files and launcher scripts for a development environment
 - the "Debian" distribution (DEB package)
 - the "CentOS" distribution (RPM package)
 - the "Desktop Web UI" distribution that includes the Web UI

See the following sections for more details on how to enable these distributions and to know which optional Maven profiles can be activated.


CLI Distribution
----------------

Build the default distribution with:

	mvn clean package

On Windows and macOS, the Windows installer and macOS application bundle distributions are respectively enabled by default.

macOS Application Bundle Distribution
--------------------------------------

To build a MacOS application bundle:

    mvn clean package -Pmac

The `mac` profile will package the DAISY Pipeline as a macOS application bundle (`.app` package), and will put it inside a disk image (`.dmg` file).

The disk image is created with the [`node-appdmg` tool](https://github.com/LinusU/node-appdmg), run with a local version of Node installed by the Maven build in the `target` directory.

This distribution can only be built on a Mac.

Windows Installer Distribution
--------------------------------------

To build an installer for Windows:

    mvn clean package -Pwin

The `win` profile will package the DAISY Pipeline into an executable installer.

The installer is created with [NSIS](http://nsis.sourceforge.net/Main_Page). 

Developers Distribution
-----------------------

Build the development environment with:

    mvn clean package -P dev-launcher

This distribution includes a launcher script for the Pipeline engine, as well as configuration files to include
modules installed in the user's default Maven repository (in `~/.m2/`).

Configuration files are generated for all the POM modules, including the braille modules.
    
Debian Distribution
-------------------

Build a Debian package with:

    mvn clean package -P deb

Inspect package contents and metadata:

    dpkg-deb -c target/*.deb
    dpkg-deb -f target/*.deb

Install the package:

    dpkg -i target/*.deb

Uninstall:

    dpkg -r daisy-pipeline

Red Hat/CentOS Distribution
---------------------------

Build an RPM package with:

    mvn clean package -P rpm

Note: only proven to work on Red Hat/CentOS, although it should be
theoretically possible to build RPMs on other platforms including Mac
OS after installing rpmbuild.

To install the package:

    rpm -i target/rpm/pipeline2/RPMS/x86_64/*.rpm

Desktop WebUI  Distribution
---------------------------

Build the Web UI distribution with:

    mvn clean package -P webui

This distribution does **not** disable the default CLI distribution. Both will be built.

A Windows installer (build with NSIS) can be generated by activating the `installer` profile:

    mvn clean package -P webui,installer

Release Procedure
-----------------
Major releases (officially announced) are versioned as "1.x.0". In-between releases, such as
bugfix releases or the monthly releases done by Bert with braille updates, are versioned as "1.x.y".

The release is performed with Maven:

```sh
mvn clean release:clean release:prepare -DpushChanges=false
mvn release:perform -DlocalCheckout=true
```

Then, in order to upload also the Debian package:

```sh
git checkout HEAD^ && mvn clean deploy -Pdeb,sonatype-oss-release
```

Note that the web UI and CLI Debian profiles have been disabled because they are updated less
frequently than the server.

Then stage the artifacts at https://oss.sonatype.org and do all the required testing before finally
releasing the artifacts.
